[Statistics] Final Section on Statistical Visualizations (#126)
JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience: contents/stats_vis.md

## Statistical Visualizations {#sec:stats_vis}

There are several statistical visualization techniques.
We will focus on mainly two: **box plots** and **density plots**, since they are the most used and our preferred way to analyze univariate data.

> We will also use the same `more_grades` dataset from @sec:stats_central.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will also use the `more_grades` dataset from @sec:stats_central.
```

### Box Plots {#sec:stats_vis_boxplots}

> Box plots are a method for graphically depicting numerical data through their quartiles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Box plots are a method for graphically depicting numerical data through their quartiles (see @fig:boxplot).
```

The "box" is typically represented by the quartiles 1 to 3.
The median, second quartile -- Q2, or percentile 0.5, is the line inside the box.
The first and third quartile, Q1 and Q3, or percentiles 0.25 and 0.75, respectively, are the box's lower and upper bounds.
Finally, we have the "whisker" which, traditionally (and default in most data visualization techniques), is the range composed by extending the interquartile range (IQR) by 1.5.

The basic box plot can be drawn using `Makie.jl` (see Chapter -@sec:datavisMakie).
It accepts a `x` and `y` vectors which represents the positions of the categories and the variables within the boxes, respectively.

> Since our vector `x` is a `Vector{String}` we need to convert it to `categorical` using `CategoricalArrays` (@sec:missing_data) and then pass the `Axis` keyword argument `xticks` (see @sec:datavisMakie_attributes) as a tuple of values and labels.

Reviewer: Very nice to see how the chapters start to work together

> Since our vector `x` is a `Vector{String}` we need to convert it to `categorical` using `CategoricalArrays` (@sec:missing_data) and then pass the `Axis` keyword argument `xticks` (see @sec:datavisMakie_attributes) as a tuple of values and labels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the elements in our vector `x` are of type `String`, we need to convert it to `categorical` using `CategoricalArrays.jl` (@sec:missing_data) and then pass the `Axis` keyword argument `xticks` (see @sec:datavisMakie_attributes) as a tuple of values and labels.
```

    fig = Figure(; resolution=(600, 400))
    ax = Axis(fig[1, 1]; xticks = (1:4, levels(df.name)))
    boxplot!(ax, levelcode.(df.name), df.grade; range=2.0, whiskerwidth=0.5)
    Options(current_figure(); filename=label, caption, label) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

Box plots can also flag anything outside the whiskers as outliers.
By default, these observations are not shown in `Makie.jl` but you can control it with the `show_outliers` argument:

```jl
s = """
    CairoMakie.activate!() # hide
    label = "boxplot_outliers" # hide
    caption = "Box Plot with Outliers" # hide
    df = more_grades()
    transform!(df, :name => categorical; renamecols=false)
    fig = Figure(; resolution=(600, 400))
    ax = Axis(fig[1, 1]; xticks = (1:4, levels(df.name)))
    boxplot!(ax, levelcode.(df.name), df.grade; range=0.5, show_outliers=true)
    Options(current_figure(); filename=label, caption, label) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

As you can see, **box plots are a useful way to visualize data with robust central tendencies and dispersion measures to outliers**.

### Density Plots {#sec:stats_vis_densityplots}

Box plot limit us just to summary statistics like median, quartiles and IQRs.

> Often we want to see the full distribution of our data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often, we want to get a clearer picture of the distribution of our data.
```
Not the best sentence that I'm suggestion here. I'm trying to convey that density plots (kernel density estimators) are approximations and don't show "the full distribution".

Author: Ok, I changed this in the new commit f6c9526

Reviewer: Yes, great :+1: thanks

Thus, we define a `values` function that will accept a `code` argument to filter the dataset's variable `name` wrapped with the `levelcode` function.
Then, we plot a density `pltobj` for each one of the variable `name`'s `levels`.
Finally, we make sure that the density `plotobj`s have their own `ytick` with the `offset` keyword paired with a custom `yticks` in the `Axis` constructor by specifying, same as before, a tuple of values and labels.
The effect of the `offset` in the `for` loop is the increment from 1 to 4, by 1, of both the `offset` argument for `density!` and the `code` argument for `values`:

```jl
s = """
    CairoMakie.activate!() # hide
    label = "densityplot" # hide
    caption = "Density Plot" # hide
    df = more_grades()
    transform!(df, :name => categorical; renamecols=false)
    categories = levels(df.name)
    values(code) = filter(row -> levelcode.(row.name) == code, df).grade
    fig = Figure(; resolution=(600, 400))
    ax = Axis(fig[1, 1]; yticks = (1:4, categories), limits=((-1, 11), nothing))
    for i in 1:length(categories)
        density!(ax, values(i); offset=i)
    end

>     Options(current_figure(); filename=label, caption, label) # hide

Reviewer: Maybe an annoying comment, but can something be done about the top (Sally) in both these figures? It looks very weird:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20724914/134229502-c3ce10d4-7e80-40eb-a6b6-1f3cca576c67.png)

Author: @lazarusA what you think?

Reviewer 2: sure, maybe some `scale_to =` will fix it, or a lower offset. Tomorrow I will check... today no more code.

Reviewer 2: it seems that `density` does not have a `scale_to = ` arg, so my suggestion will be to have a different offset. But still that distribution is Sally's doing. Which is also ok.

Author: Poor Sally, @rikhuijzer gave her a grade 1 (from 0 to 10)

    """
sco(s)
```

As explained in @sec:makie_colors, we can change Makie's colors by either specifying a `color` or ` colormap`.
This can also be applied to `density`:

```jl
s = """
    CairoMakie.activate!() # hide
    label = "densityplot_colors" # hide
    caption = "Density Plots with Different Color Schemes" # hide
    df = more_grades()
    transform!(df, :name => categorical; renamecols=false)
    categories = levels(df.name)
    values(code) = filter(row -> levelcode.(row.name) == code, df).grade
    fig = Figure(; resolution=(600, 400))
    ax1 = Axis(fig[1, 1]; yticks = (1:4, categories), limits=((-1, 11), nothing))
    ax2 = Axis(fig[1, 2]; yticks = (1:4, categories), limits=((-1, 11), nothing))
    for i in 1:length(categories)
        density!(ax1, values(i); offset=i, color=(:dodgerblue, 0.5))
    end
    for i in 1:length(categories)
        density!(ax2, values(i); offset=i, color=:x, colormap=:viridis)
    end
    Options(current_figure(); filename=label, caption, label) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

Here, in the first figure (left) we are using a specific `color` for all `density!`'s `plotobj`s.

> And in the second figure (right) we pass the `:x` argument to `color` to tell Makie to apply the `colormap` gradient along the x-axis (from left to right) while also specifying which `colormap` palette as `:viridis`.

Reviewer: Could you also specify the benefit of this?

Author: 😂 I don't have any. This is just customizations for the user to do as pleased.

Reviewer 2: The color code gradient in the `y` direction is most common and is a visual aid to easily identify trends. In the `x` direction is useful when you want to know how things go in time, distance, etc... (your variable), but is not widely used.

Author: This is good I will add this /\

> ### Anscombe Quartet {#sec:stats_vis_anscombe}

Reviewer: This section is super clear, pretty and to the point. I love it :100:

## Statistical Visualizations {#sec:stats_vis}

There are several statistical visualization techniques.

> We will focus on mainly two: **box plots** and **density plots**, since they are the most used and our preferred way to analyze univariate data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For now, we will focus on only two: **box plots** and **density plots**, since they are commonly used to analyze univariate data.
```

We will also use the `more_grades` dataset from @sec:stats_central.

### Box Plots {#sec:stats_vis_boxplots}

Box plots are a method for graphically depicting numerical data through their quartiles (see @fig:boxplot).

> The "box" is typically represented by the quartiles 1 to 3.

Reviewer 2: Probably, saying what a quartile is would not hurt here.

Author: Actually they are already in the early part of the chapter. I will put something like:
> (see section XX)

The median, second quartile -- Q2, or percentile 0.5, is the line inside the box.
The first and third quartile, Q1 and Q3, or percentiles 0.25 and 0.75, respectively, are the box's lower and upper bounds.
Finally, we have the "whisker" which, traditionally (and default in most data visualization techniques), is the range composed by extending the interquartile range (IQR) by 1.5.

The basic box plot can be drawn using `Makie.jl` (see Chapter -@sec:datavisMakie).

> It accepts a `x` and `y` vectors which represents the positions of the categories and the variables within the boxes, respectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It accepts an `x` and `y` vectors which represents the positions of the categories and the variables within the boxes, respectively.
```

    df = more_grades()
    transform!(df, :name => categorical; renamecols=false)
    fig = Figure(; resolution=(600, 400))
    ax = Axis(fig[1, 1]; xticks = (1:4, levels(df.name)))
    boxplot!(ax, levelcode.(df.name), df.grade; range=2.0, whiskerwidth=0.5)
    Options(current_figure(); filename=label, caption, label) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

Box plots can also flag anything outside the whiskers as outliers.
By default, these observations are not shown in `Makie.jl` but you can control it with the `show_outliers` argument:

```jl
s = """
    CairoMakie.activate!() # hide
    label = "boxplot_outliers" # hide
    caption = "Box Plot with Outliers" # hide
    df = more_grades()
    transform!(df, :name => categorical; renamecols=false)
    fig = Figure(; resolution=(600, 400))
    ax = Axis(fig[1, 1]; xticks = (1:4, levels(df.name)))
    boxplot!(ax, levelcode.(df.name), df.grade; range=0.5, show_outliers=true)
    Options(current_figure(); filename=label, caption, label) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

As you can see, **box plots are a useful way to visualize data with robust central tendencies and dispersion measures to outliers**.

### Histograms {#sec:stats_vis_histograms}

> Box plots limit us just to summary statistics like median, quartiles and IQRs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Box plots limit us just to summarize statistics like median, quartiles and IQRs.
```

We can draw histograms using `Makie.jl`:

```jl
s = """
    CairoMakie.activate!() # hide
    label = "histogram" # hide
    caption = "Histogram" # hide
    df = more_grades()
    fig = Figure(; resolution=(600, 400))
    ax = Axis(fig[1, 1], xticks=1:10)
    hist!(ax, df.grade; color=(:dodgerblue, 0.5))
    Options(current_figure(); filename=label, caption, label) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

Note that by default `hist!` uses 15 bins.
We can change that with the `bins` keyword:

```jl
s = """
    CairoMakie.activate!() # hide
    label = "histogram_bins" # hide
    caption = "Histogram with Custom Bins" # hide
    df = more_grades()
    fig = Figure(; resolution=(600, 400))
    ax = Axis(fig[1, 1], xticks=1:10)
    hist!(ax, df.grade; color=(:dodgerblue, 0.5), bins=10)
    Options(current_figure(); filename=label, caption, label) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

We can see clearly that most of the grades are between 4 and 9.

### Density Plots {#sec:stats_vis_densityplots}

Histograms are discrete approximations.
If we would like to have continuous approximations we need something else: **density plots**.
**Density plots are graphical density estimations of numerical data**.

> It shows us the approximate distribution of a given variable by depicting it as a density, where the higher the curve at a given point more likely is the variable to take certain value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It shows us the approximate distribution of a given variable by depicting it as a density, where the higher the curve at a given point is, the more likely is the variable to take a certain value.
```

> The density plot can also be drawn using `Makie.jl`, however it is more convoluted than the box plot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A density plot can also be drawn using `Makie.jl`, however it is more convoluted than the box plot.
```

First, we want to pass for each `density!` function only the values with respect to one observation.
Thus, we define a `values` function that will accept a `code` argument to filter the dataset's variable `name` wrapped with the `levelcode` function.
Then, we plot a density `pltobj` for each one of the variable `name`'s `levels`.
Finally, we make sure that the density `plotobj`s have their own `ytick` with the `offset` keyword paired with a custom `yticks` in the `Axis` constructor by specifying, same as before, a tuple of values and labels.
The effect of the `offset` in the `for` loop is the increment from 1 to 4, by 1, of both the `offset` argument for `density!` and the `code` argument for `values`:

```jl
s = """
    CairoMakie.activate!() # hide
    label = "densityplot" # hide
    caption = "Density Plot" # hide
    df = more_grades()
    transform!(df, :name => categorical; renamecols=false)
    categories = levels(df.name)
    values(code) = filter(row -> levelcode.(row.name) == code, df).grade
    fig = Figure(; resolution=(600, 400))
    ax = Axis(fig[1, 1]; yticks = (1:4, categories), limits=((-1, 11), nothing))
    for i in 1:length(categories)

>         density!(ax, values(i); offset=i)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        density!(ax, values(i); offset= i*0.7)
```

    label = "densityplot_colors" # hide
    caption = "Density Plots with Different Color Schemes" # hide
    df = more_grades()
    transform!(df, :name => categorical; renamecols=false)
    categories = levels(df.name)
    values(code) = filter(row -> levelcode.(row.name) == code, df).grade
    fig = Figure(; resolution=(600, 400))
    ax1 = Axis(fig[1, 1]; yticks = (1:4, categories), limits=((-1, 11), nothing))
    ax2 = Axis(fig[1, 2]; yticks = (1:4, categories), limits=((-1, 11), nothing))
    for i in 1:length(categories)
        density!(ax1, values(i); offset=i, color=(:dodgerblue, 0.5))
    end
    for i in 1:length(categories)
        density!(ax2, values(i); offset=i, color=:x, colormap=:viridis)
    end
    Options(current_figure(); filename=label, caption, label) # hide
    """
sco(s)
```

Here, in the first figure (left) we are using a specific `color` for all `density!`'s `plotobj`s.
And in the second figure (right) we pass the `:x` argument to `color` to tell Makie to apply the `colormap` gradient along the x-axis (from left to right) while also specifying which `colormap` palette as `:viridis`.

### Anscombe Quartet {#sec:stats_vis_anscombe}

> We conclude this Statistics chapter with a demonstration of the **importance of data visualization in statistical analyzes**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We conclude this Statistics chapter with a demonstration of the **importance of data visualization in statistical analysis**.
```

> For this, we present the **Anscombe Quartet** [@anscombe1973graphs], which comprises four datasets that have *nearly identical* simple descriptive statistics, yet have very *different* distributions and appear very different when **graphed**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this, we present the **Anscombe Quartet** [@anscombe1973graphs], which comprises four datasets that have *nearly identical* simple descriptive statistics, yet have very *different* distributions and appear very different when **plotted**.
```
graphed is has to do more with graphs, when you want to show connections and relationships among components.

Each dataset has 11 observations with `x` and `y` variables.

> They were created in 1973 by the statistician Francis Anscombe to show the importance of graphing data before conducting statistical analyzes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They were created in 1973 by the statistician Francis Anscombe to show the importance of plotting data before conducting statistical analysis.
```

```

Now, if you look at the descriptive statistics for both `x` and `y` variables in all 4 datasets they are pretty much the same along with their correlation (both up to 2 decimal places):

```jl
s = """
    df = anscombe_quartet()
    round_up = x -> round(x; digits=2)
    combine(groupby(df, :dataset),
                    [:x, :y] .=> round_up .∘ [mean std],
                    [:x, :y]  => round_up ∘ cor)
    """
sco(s; process=without_caption_label)
```

Now, if we take a look at a simple scatter plot of all 4 datasets, we clearly see that something else is going on:

```jl
fig = plot_anscombe()
caption = "Anscombe Quartet"
label = "plot_anscombe"
Options(fig; filename=label, caption, label)
```

Here, the first dataset (upper left) is a frequent situation that we encounter in data science: `x` and `y` are correlated with added random noise.
The second dataset (upper right), we see a perfect correlation except for an outlier in the second to last observation.
For the third dataset (lower left), the relationship is non-linear.
Finally, for the fourth dataset (lower right) there isn't any relationship except by an outlier observation.

> Anscombe Quartet tells us that sometimes **descriptive statistics can fool us** and we should rely also in **visualizations** to analyze our data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Anscombe Quartet tells us that sometimes **descriptive statistics can fool us** and we should rely also on **visualizations** to analyze our data.
```
